what the heck is the deal with Instagram hashtags
why are your Instagram hashtags not working why
are you not getting the views reach and engagement
that you feel like you deserve even though you
feel like you're jumping through all the hoops and
checking off all the necessary boxes when it comes
to hashtags that is exactly what we're going
to be talking about today what problems might
you be making that you might not even realize are
problems what mistakes can easily be avoided and
how do you actually get engagement and reach and
benefits from using half tags on your Instagram
posts today we're going to hop right into things I
have six key mistakes that people are making with
their hashtags on Instagram and these mistakes
are what are preventing you from getting the
benefits that you feel like you deserve from the
post that you're working really hard [Music] on
and make sure that you stick around until the end
because the sixth and final mistake is probably
the one that most people are making especially if
you feel like you've been on Instagram for a few
years and you kind of understand hashtags but you
just don't understand what you are doing wrong the
sixth mistake is kind of a higher level mistake so
make sure to stick around until the end but you're
not going to like to hear the first one and the
first mistake that people are making with their
hashtags is setting their expectations for their
hashtags too high setting your Instagram hashtag
expectations at a level where hashtags were
performing in 2016 and 2017 is going to result
in a lot of disappointment because the reality is
hashtags are not going to perform as well in 2024
as they were just a few years ago and part of
the reason for that actually has nothing to do
with hashtags it just has to do with the overall
ecosystem that is Instagram most people understand
that on Instagram there is an algorithm that
decides who sees your posts and when but one
of the challenges that we're all currently facing
on Instagram right now is that there's been a huge
increase in Supply also known as the total number
of posts being shared the amount of posts being
shared per day per person and the total number of
accounts on Instagram has significantly increased
over the last few years now with over 2 billion
users and more and more people posting more and
more times each and every month so the supply
is way up on the other end of that equation the
demand is not way up the amount of time that
the average person spends on Instagram has
not increased in fact according to which studies
you look at it's either stayed the same or even
According to some studies the amount of time that
we spend on Instagram has gone down by about 1 or
2 minutes each day and that might not sound like
a big deal but when you think about the fact that
the average reel is around 30 seconds long if
the average person is spending 2 minutes Less
on Instagram each day that means that there are
four less views or four less reals that could
be viewed by each person that multiplied across 2
billion Instagram users is going to result in the
vast majority of us seeing a decrease in our views
our reach and our engagement in fact according to
a recent study that was published by metrol Real's
views were down by 76% on average in 2023 that
is a direct result of this supply and demand in
Balance so for everyone views and engagement and
reach are down but views and reach and engagement
are also down for hashtags in 2019 posts that had
hashtags whether they had one hashtag or 30
hashtags had around a 6 and a 12% engage Eng
agement rate by 2021 that number was almost cut in
half to just 3.5% as the engagement rate for posts
with hashtags now in 2024 those numbers are even
lower but of course that might not be a problem
with hashtags that might just be a problem like I
talked about earlier where we're all getting less
engagement nowadays one interesting study that
does show the change in hashtag Effectiveness
is that on average posts receive an equal amount
of reach to both hashtags explore and the Prof
file most posts will get you an equal number of
views from those three areas in the past however
people got significantly more views from hashtags
now people are getting much more of their views
from the reals page the explore page and even
their profile page rather than hashtag Pages
even Instagram's CEO himself now numerous times
has confirmed that hashtags should not be used
or relied upon to increase your reach even today
on the day that I'm recording this he has an in
Instagram story up where someone asked him so dot
dot dot what's the verdict on hashtags and here's
what he said hashtags don't meaningfully affect
your reach I know that's not what most people
think it is possible in some very small edge cases
it can help but if you are expecting that you're
going to add a hashtag and you're going to see a
meaningful increase in your reach on that post I
apologize but that is not going to happen and he
has said this time and time again hashtags could
for a while noticeably and reliably increase
your reach but that was never how they were
designed by Instagram hashtags were created as a
way to categorize your content as a way to tell
the algorithm hey algorithm this is a picture
of pizza hey algorithm I have a nail salon that
I run hey Instagram I have a mom and pop Boutique
where we sell children's clothing whatever that's
what hashtags were used for they were used to
categorize and to put your content into certain
buckets if you will but social media marketers
like myself and many others very quickly realized
that we could use these categorization tools we
could use these hashtags to reach more people
because people were searching for these things
people were following hashtags people were looking
things up and back in the day just a few years ago
when you look something up on Instagram you really
only found results that were from hashtags there
weren't other ways to search for things there
wasn't audio the searchability of just keywords
in general was much much worse just a few years
ago and so if you looked up pizza in the search
bar on Instagram you were getting results that
used hashtag pizza but as we marketers continued
to misuse the feature that is hashtags Instagram
started to change the way hashtags worked
and the way hashtags were distributed and
the way hashtags benefited posts to lessen their
effectiveness because again that's not what they
were intended for in the first place and so
Instagram didn't want us to continue misusing
this feature that actually had a very helpful
and useful use case if it was used properly so
does that mean that hashtags are dead no you can
absolutely still get views from hashtag and as
I said just a moment ago the amount of views on
average that people are getting from hashtags is
actually equal to what they're getting on average
from the explore page and from the profile page
so as we move through number two through six
on this list I'm going to give you some tips
and strategies to help you figure out how to get
more views and more engagement from your hashtags
but before we even get into the rest of this
list let's lower our expectations a little
and I hate saying this but it's the honest truth
it's the reality of where we're at with hashtags
on Instagram let's lower the bar a little bit
and stop relying on them that's my biggest thing
that's my biggest argument if I was to stand on a
soap box and you know have a speech about hashtags
it would be this stop relying on hashtags stop
stressing out over them there's something that
can help you but you shouldn't rely on them to
consistently boost your engage engagement all
right so now that we're all on the same page with
what we should expect out of hashtags the second
mistake that people are making that is hurting
your potential reach and results from hashtags
is using too many earlier you might have caught
when I said using between 1 and 30 hashtags I
chose the number 30 not just as some random
number 30 is the upper limit you are allowed
to use up to 30 hashtags on Instagram for a while
it was a best practice to use 28 hashtags and the
reason people like myself used to teach using 28
hashtags is because even though you were allowed
to use 30 you didn't ever want to cross that
threshold or accidentally use 31 or 32 because
then Instagram would count none of your hashtags
and it would oftentimes delete your entire chunk
of hashtags that you tried to use and so we would
oftentimes recommend using 28 hashtags as kind of
just a safeguard so you didn't accidentally go
over the number 30 but then over the last few
years as the hashtag algorithm has changed what
we've learned is using that many hashtags can
actually confuse the algorithm because again let's
go back to the purpose of hashtags the purpose is
to categorize your content and so when you're
using 20 25 28 30 hashtags on your post you're
putting your post in 30 different categories
which you might think well hey if I'm in more
categories that means that more people can find
me well yes in theory that might be true and the
logic sounds correct on paper but in practice it
confuses the algorithm because now you have told
the algorithm put me in all of these different
areas and so it doesn't know whom to show your
post to it doesn't know what interests your post
would fit into and it doesn't know what people
would be most interested in seeing your post so
when you put hashtags on your Instagram post I
would recommend sticking in the 3 to five range
that's not an exact number you're not going to get
penalized if you use two you're not going to get
penalized if you use six but according to numerous
studies less is actually more with your hashtag
so even if you only use one hashtag it might be
more beneficial than if you use six hashtags but 3
to five generally speaking is a good range to fall
within for your hashtags I should also say before
we go any further I actually have an entire guide
to hashtags and it's not just hashtags it's also
something we're going to talk a little bit about
later called SEO and keywords it's a entire robust
mult multipage ebook figuring out how to pick your
best hashtags how to incorporate keywords into
your posts and essentially how to get discovered
more on Instagram so if you want to grab that it's
free for you to download you can click on the link
Down Below in the show notes or the description of
this podcast and download that free hashtag guide
today's episode will give you a great starting
point for your hashtags but that guide is really
everything that you could ever need to know about
having success with hashtags SEO and keywords on
on Instagram mistake number three that might
be the reason your hashtags are not working is
because you're using hashtags that are too vague
hashtags that are too popular and hashtags that
are just too overcrowded I do recommend doing
some research into the hashtags that you plan
on using before you actually put them on your
posts and when you are doing said research I
don't recommend using any hashtag that has more
than 10 million prior uses if there are already
more than 10 million posts using that hashtag
the likelihood that you become a top post is very
small and so I recommend using smaller hashtags
really ideally Hashtags with less than 1 million
previous uses that way you aren't getting too
popular or too vague things like hasht Fitness
hash entrepreneur hash business owner hash real
estate hash marketing these are Big Industry terms
right these are General broad topics which are
way too vague in just a little bit we're going
to talk more about what hashtags you should be
using and what you should look for but generally
speaking a really common mistake that I see a lot
of people making is using just big popular generic
hashtags that don't truly describe their content
and that are just so overused you're never going
to get discovered now I just mentioned becoming a
top post within hashtags that is a recent change
to the hashtag algorithm and to the way hashtags
are presented on Instagram in general you see in
the past when you looked up a hashtag on Instagram
you were shown two different pages or I should say
you had two different pages that you could look
at the first page was called top or top posts
and it showed you the posts that had the highest
engagement rate or that were the best examples of
whatever a certain hashtag is so if you look
up # Pizza you would probably see a bunch of
different slices of pizza as top posts there was
also a section called recent which was a reverse
chronological order constantly updating cycle a
feed a grid if you will of every person and every
post that has ever used #t pizza so you could
theoretically scroll all the way to the bottom
and find the first ever person who used hash pizza
and the post at the top were the people who had
used # Pizza most recently this is one of the key
reasons that reach for hashtags on Instagram has
gone down so significantly people used to go
to that recent section and it was very easy to
discover post because it wasn't based off of an
algorithm it wasn't based off of who had the top
post it was just based off Whoever has used that
hashtag recently unfortunately this was a feature
that was abused by some people who were overusing
certain hashtags to dominate certain hashtags and
this feature was abused by scammers and spammers
who were targeting people who had recently used
a hashtag so if you used hashtag Fitness maybe a
bunch of spam Bots were going to come after you
and do something minimal like like your post and
comment something like like check out my page or
come after you with something more aggressive
like fishing or some sort of spam attack and
so Instagram has completely gotten rid of this
recent category within hashtags which means that
it's significantly harder now to get discovered
unless your posts are becoming a top poost that's
why you want to use a hashtag that is smaller so
that you can become a top post the likelihood that
you have one of the top #fitness related posts of
all the two billion people on Instagram is pretty
unlikely but the likelihood that you have one of
the top posts that is relating to #fitness coach
Illinois that is a lot more likely so that's what
I mean when I'm saying that we should use hashtags
that are more specific and not so vague the fourth
mistake that you might be making and this one is
something that when I say it you're going to be
like Ah that's not me but it might be and it's
using band hashtags and now I'm sure your initial
reaction is like Brock I don't use band hashtags I
don't use curse words or you know inappropriate
language in my hashtags but that's not all that
is banned on Instagram a site that I'm going to
recommend you check out that we will link up in
the show notes as well is metah hashtag.com it's a
website where you can put in your hashtag or your
planned hashtags and just check and see if any of
them are banned there isn't a full comprehensive
list that's available on the internet because
it's constantly changing and being updated so I
would recommend at least once a month taking the
hashtags that you are using or that you plan on
using and putting them into some of these online
checkers to see if you have accidentally used any
banned hashtags I'll read off some of them right
now that might surprise you # lean # kickoff # ice
# dat or # dating # push-ups #w woman or # women
# workflow and so many more now if you use a band
hashtag it's not like your Instagram is going to
get disabled or taken down but that post might be
shown to less people all of the hashtags used on
that post might not count it's not exactly clear
Instagram has never directly told us what happens
when we used a band hashtag but it's not a good
thing so of course you want to avoid using those
use one of the checkers use one of the sites that
I recommended and just make sure that you're
not using any hashtags that might get you in
trouble speaking of something that might get you
in trouble is the fifth mistake on this list and
it is repeating the same list of hashtags numerous
times repeating the same list of hashtags on every
single post this is something that used to be
very common practice but we have learned that it's
actually something that is detrimental it used
to be very helpful to write a list of hashtags
in your notes and maybe this is something that you
even do to this day you have a list of hashtags in
your notes or maybe you have a keyword shortcut
set up so that you type in hashtag one and then
it like populates a list of hashtags I know
that's something I used to do myself and you
just copy and paste or you pop pop in that exact
same list on every single post that is something
that can actually be deemed as spammy behavior
on Instagram and might result in decreased reach
over time or just your posts getting less views
and less potential engagement because Instagram
thinks you might be trying to game the system you
might be trying to abuse or dominate those certain
hashtags and so I recommend not using a copy and
paste list not just using the same list every
time but actually varying your list of hashtags
every time typing them out manually and putting
them in uniquely with each post now I know one
of the real benefits of the copy and paste thing
was that it saved you a lot of time but that also
comes from a time where the strategy was using 25
to 30 hashtags on your posts now since I'm only
recommending that you use three to five hashtags
hopefully it's a little bit easier for you to just
manually type those out each time now sixth last
but not least arguably most importantly I hope
no one skipped ahead to this point I hope you
listened to the five previous tips because there
were quite a few tips so far that I think could
make a real difference for the results that you're
getting from your hashtags but the sixth and final
mistake that I see a lot of people making is
they're using hashtags that relate to their
industry or maybe even their Niche or they're
using hashtags that relate to their account
as a whole rather than using hashtags that are
specific to that post and to that piece of content
let me give you an example that should hopefully
articulate what I mean let's say you are are a
fitness coach from Illinois you might be tempted
to use #fitness coach # Illinois workout # atome
Fitness because those are the things that you
normally post about those are the terms or topics
that just generally describe your account but you
should only use those if those also describe your
post let's say that the specific post that
you just made was about the common mistakes
people make doing squats things that they are
doing wrong things that might be bad in their
technique mistakes they're making when they
are doing squats at home you would want to use
hashtags that relate to that specific content so
you would want to use # squat mistakes # propers
squat technique # proper squat form things like
that that directly and explicitly describe the
post the real the photo itself that is going to
give the algorithm it's best shot at determining
what your post is truly about and showing it to
the people who would truly be interested in that
post also if people are searching hashtags and
you do become a top post within a hashtag you
want to make sure that your post directly talks to
or directly talks about whatever that topic is you
want to make sure that if people are searching #
propers squat technique that they find your post
and when you put this strategy into practice where
you're actually using your hashtags to describe
your post it will prevent you from just falling
back to the copy and paste method it will probably
prevent you from using the exact same hashtags
every time hopefully it prevents you from using
generic hashtags that are super broad hopefully it
prevents you from using banned hashtags although I
would still recommend double-checking because you
never know what's going to be a band hashtag these
days and overall it's going to give your post
its best chance at success I will throw in one
more bonus tip and that is that using hashtags on
your Instagram stories is absolutely pointless if
you are doing that it serves literally no purpose
it shows up nowhere it doesn't put your stories
anywhere stories don't have organic reach to
non-followers said another way stories will
only be seen by your existing followers so don't
waste your time putting hashtags on your stories
hashtags only go on feed posts which are your
reals your photos and your carousels that you
are sharing to your actual profile thank you so
much for listening today and before you go make
sure you download that entire hashtag guide that
is available for you for free down in the show
notes or the description below this episode that
will give you a much more in-depth understanding
of not just hashtags but the replacement to
hashtags which is SEO and keywords that's really
the future of growing on Instagram and the future
of getting discovered on and off of Instagram
so make sure to check out that free guide I will
see you next time and as always happy networking
[Music] oh [Music]